Now the tape is on, so everything is on. I will tell you, to be honest from the
start, that I don't feel real suited to do this interview. I really like your
work. I've read everything. I've read some of it more than once. I'm a real left
hemisphere person, and so some of the things that you write I feel instead of I
don't see the logic, but I feel it. And so sometimes I'm going to be grabbing
for words because I just don't know how to express myself very well. That's
fine. I do better on paper than aloud. Okay. Well, we edit this heavily and try
to make everybody sound as good as possible. It's very informal. If you want us
to repeat a question or you don't like something you said or something we said,
we'll just go back and do it over with, so there's no problem. And if you've got
to take a break or you just get tired or whatever, just let me know. Okay. So
let's start it. Okay. Your background is in English and apparently you went
quite far in your education in English and then teaching, and now you're a
writer and you write science fiction. How did you decide or why as a person so
interested in English do you write in the genre of science fiction? Well, the
truth is that I have wanted to be a writer since I was in about the eighth great
and I did not necessarily want to be a science fiction writer. I wanted to be
just a writer. The reason that I'm doing science fiction now or have done
primarily science fiction is that I was first successful in submitting stories
that had a fantastic or a science fictional element and in having them sell. The
other stories, the mainstream stories that I wrote, received primarily rejection
slips early on. And, as I've said before, I'm kind of like the rat in the
experimental cage who goes to the lever and presses it and when the food comes
out of one particular lever, that's the one he goes back to and continues to
press. And that's the way I have done as far as science fiction goes to some
extent. It's not that I don't care for science fiction and I'm doing it solely
because it was profitable or more profitable than the other type of writing, but
simply that I ended up finding very receptive editors in this particular field.
And that accounts for it, more or less. Does science fiction give you perhaps a
range, it's very forgiving as far as the subject matter and the way it's
handled, a little more so than other genres. Is that attractive to you?
Certainly, I think that's true. I think that science fiction does permit a
writer to deal with just about anything that he or she wishes to deal with. You
can handle contemporary events by projecting them into the future. You can
speculate about the past. You can speculate about the distant, distant future.
You can speculate about origins and ultimate ends. So that I think that really,
science fiction is a tremendously flexible genre. And that's one of its main
attractions to me. And one of the reasons why I think I continue to write it
even though I have aspirations to do other things and have done other things. Do
you think, or do you write for a particular audience? Or do you write what
pleases you and it, by happy chance, does seem to tickle a lot of people? I
think that for the most part I try to write what interests me and I hope then
that it will interest somebody else. I've read a number of things fairly
recently which suggest that even though my work is very well crafted and
carefully thought out, that I may be not reaching the audience that some other
writers are reaching because their work seems more readily accessible on a first
look. I wish that that were not the case, but I don't know how to do things any
differently than I do them. I try not to be inaccessible, that's for certain,
and I do feel that some of my more recent work has reached a larger audience
than perhaps the first two or three novels that I wrote.
Okay, now I want to start into a line of questions kind of about specific works,
and the one I want to start with is A Funeral for the Eyes of Fire, which was
your first novel and that came out in 1975, and that's the first thing I read of
yours because I read a very good review of it right when it came out. And it got
award nominations, but then four years later or so you came out with Eyes of
Fire and you said that if you had had your way the text and the title of the
other one would vanish from the earth. Why, what made you think that the first
one was so bad? Well, it's not that I thought that the first one was so bad, and
incidentally it's not that I wanted to get rid of the title. I still like the
title A Funeral for the Eyes of Fire much better than I like simply Eyes of
Fire. But my editor at Pocket Books, when I rewrote the book, felt that we ought
to give it a title that was new, but that at the same time reflected the fact
that it was not a brand new work, that I was revising an earlier work. As far as
my feelings about A Funeral for the Eyes of Fire go, the original novel
published by Ballantyne, I just feel that I was learning my way then. That was
the first time I had ever attempted anything at novel length. I had done short
stories and novellas up to that point, but never anything of the length or the
substance of funeral. And to me, when I go back and read the book now, I can see
all of the places where I was obviously a beginning writer struggling to create
a narrative, and very often lapsing into mini essays of one sort or another,
rather than having the action proceed in a logical and really orderly fashion
because of the behavior of the characters. As a consequence, when I go back and
look at it, I see my characters lecturing each other. I see gaps in the
narrative. I see not inconsistencies necessarily, but I just see the awkwardness
of a young writer trying to handle a form with which he's not yet familiar. I
honestly feel that in the revision, which Pocketbooks and my editor there and I
called Eyes of Fire, I honestly feel that those things are smoothed out. I also
feel that some of the thematic material is more carefully integrated into the
narrative than it was the first time around, and that I had thought a little bit
more thoroughly about that thematic material. And that's one of the reasons that
I prefer Eyes of Fire, I'll do the revision that it took to the original title.
Although I wish that I could have kept the original title. This book has
something in common with some of your other books in that it's, to some extent,
an anthropological study of these primitive aliens. It's got encounters between
the shaman and technology, that sort of thing. The aliens were treated very
shabbily. Is this kind of a parable of some things that have happened in our
past? Well, I'm sure that it's a parable of some of the things that have
happened in our past and that continue to happen in our relationships to
primitive peoples today. And I probably should put primitive in quotes because
that's a term that is frowned upon in anthropological circles right now. But at
any rate, I do think that it was a kind of dramatic framing of situations that
have taken place in the confrontation between advanced civilizations and
supposedly primitive in quotes civilizations. And it seems to me that projecting
it into a setting on a distant planet, that I was just kind of presuming that
this was the sort of thing that could happen over and over again. But at the
same time, really, it was a comment on the conflict between two different
approaches of viewing the world. One rather the technological approach and one
the rather mystical or what do you call it, the left brain side. One rather the
right brain side. One rather the right brain side. One rather the right brain
side. One rather the right brain side. One rather the right brain side. One
rather the right brain side. One rather the right brain side. One rather the
right brain side. One rather the right brain side. One rather the right brain
side. One rather the right brain side. One rather the right brain side. One
rather the right brain side. One rather the right brain side. One rather the
right brain side.
One rather the right brain side. One rather the right brain side. One rather the
right brain side. One rather the right brain side. One rather the right brain
side. Well the original title of course from a poem by Archibald MacLeese called
Andrew Marvel, which itself is a kind of answer to a poem by Andrew Marvel
entitled to this coy mistress. Both of these poems deal with what long expenses
of time and mankind's really fragility and smallness in comparison to these long
spans of time. At any rate in and strange and the trees I was trying to show
that civilizations do rise and fall. And the line from Cleese's poem seemed to
me to be a propulsor. When the book was sold to a paperback publisher, however,
Donald Wolheim and Daw Books, he did not feel that that was the sort of title
that was going to people in K-marts and bus stations and shoeshine shops to pick
up a copy of the paperback. He felt that it needed a little more commercial
title. He gave me the chance to choose various titles and I think I made a list
of four or five. Shattered moons was one of them, which really kind of echoes an
early title by Andrew Weiss Burroughs under the moons of Mars. So I felt that
that was fairly commercial sounding and it still didn't disturb me too much
replacing it for the other, although I do prefer the other title, which many
people regard, incidentally, as pretentious.
Okay, I will explore similarly here between the strange and the long short story
or whatever it is, the White Otters of Childhood, which is by far my favorite
story. And to these you have the Parfax and these people have banished mankind
to some kind of island and there are some similarities, but one is in the 52nd
century and one is in the 120th century. So I was going to ask, do these stories
come from the same kind of known universe? Yes, it's difficult for me to talk
about this with a great deal of authority right now because it's been so long
since I've thought about it, either or one of them. At the time, though, I did
intend for and strange at Act Bata and the Trees, pardon me, to be a kind of far
future sequel to the White Otters of Childhood. In other words, the situation in
and strange at Act Bata and the Trees arises after the colonizing of a planet in
another solar system, and out of the situation that prevailed on Earth as it's
set forth in the story of the White Otters of Childhood. But it's difficult for
me at this point really to explain what I was going to attempt to do with those
things. I do know that I considered On the Street of the Serpents, The White
Otters of Childhood, and Strange at Act Bata and the Trees as a kind of trilogy,
a thematic trilogy, if not necessarily a trilogy in which all of the characters
are related, that sort of thing. Okay, kind of the same question here.
I think you're
probably referring in particular to the fact that the aliens from one story may
crop up in another. The aliens from one novel may crop up in a short story. I
also use the term galactic calm, I think, to describe the galactic authority,
which is colonizing the galaxy for us. Yeah, this was kind of the shorthand that
I used at the time in order to keep from having to invent a complete colonizing
authority in each story. And also because I liked some of the alien creatures
that I had come up with, I didn't feel that I wanted to discard them completely,
so I would use them again if possible. But it wasn't really a, I don't know how
to, it wasn't terribly systematic. That's one thing I can say about it. I wasn't
planning to set dozens and dozens of novels against this background, nor dozens
and dozens of stories.
Okay, the two books, A Little Knowledge and Catacomb Years, I want to look at
them together for just a minute. Catacomb Years is a fusion, or what I call a
fusion, of six previously written stories and a new one. Seven, I think. Yeah,
that's right. Yeah, six old stories and a new one, and then A Little Knowledge
was an original novel. How did those early short stories evolve? Did they
evolve? Were you thinking of a series and then you, or did you just say, hey, I
can fuse these together and make something kind of nice out of it? Well, the
first story that I ever wrote in that series was the one called If a Flower
Could Eclipse. And I wrote that without thinking that I was ever going to do
another story against the same background, and that of course is the urban
nucleus of Atlanta, the dome city of Atlanta. Not a terribly original idea, the
dome city, but when I wrote that story, it was only the second story that I had
had published. And I was thinking that a future city should be a dome city, and
I was trying to write science fiction of a sort, even though that particular
story has a strong fantasy element as well. After I wrote that, however, I guess
I realized that there were possibilities for other stories, and I wrote another
one, and that one was The Windows in Dante's Hell, which appeared in Orbit 13, I
believe. Orbit, I can't remember at this point, really. One of the Orbit volumes
edited by Damon Knight. And at that point, I guess having written the second
story, I realized that I could go on and write others against the same backdrop,
with some of the same characters recurring. And that was what I ended up doing,
really. It wasn't a conscious plan from the beginning, by any means. In fact, I
had to do a little bit of rewriting when I went back in order to make these
stories connect in a sensible way.
You mentioned that this was the domed city of Atlanta, and that domed cities
aren't that original in science fiction. But I sense, when I read it, that a
literal domed city wasn't your first priority, that a domed city gives the
writer a chance to talk about things. Oh, Atlanta was isolated, and it was kind
of withdrawn. And if I remember right, the rest of the cities in the world
weren't domed, and they were out among the stars, whereas Atlanta was just kind
of all isolated. And I wanted to ask you in that vein, why Atlanta? Why did you
choose Atlanta? Well, I should mention that I did have it set up so that there
were other cities on the North American continent that were domed. In fact, this
was called a Federation of Urban Nuclei. So I think that there were supposed to
be approximately 20, 25 cities, and they would have included New York, Chicago,
Los Angeles, all of the major cities on the North American continent, all of the
major cities of the United States, I guess you could say, so that there was a
network of domed cities. The idea here, however, was just as you say, kind of
metaphorical. Each one of the cities was its own universe, its own world. The
people were withdrawn and isolated, and they practiced the kind of isolationism.
In fact, in the story The Windows in Dante's Hell, the old woman, Amelia
Longhope, who is bound by two people who were going to her apartment, really, to
discover what's happened to her. They find that she has created an entire world
in her apartment, which resembles the bridge of a starship, as from an old
television program, and that she has been looking outward while her own society
has been looking inward. So that was one of the things that I was trying to do
with the Dome City. I wasn't interested in the Dome City as a technological
marvel so much as I was in a, I guess I was looking at each city as a kind of
Petri dish, and I was trying to see what the human beings, the bacteria,
whatever you want to call them, inside that Petri dish were going to do, how
they were going to behave, and why they were behaving in the ways that they did.
So it was one way of focusing in on the human condition in an unusual way and in
a metaphorical way. The aliens from 61 Sinye were, as I think aliens would
probably be, which is inscrutable, but you wrote about them. So the question I'm
really curious about, they were looking for salvation. Were they really looking
for salvation? Were they sincere?
I pause because I really don't know what to tell you at this point. I would say
that what I wanted to happen in that story was, I wanted to examine, and here
I'm really going to have to stop and think because it's been a while. I wanted
to examine what would be the likely consequences of the conversion of an alien
species to a human faith. What would be the consequences to the aliens, and what
would be the consequences in particular to the human beings? And I guess my
reason for wanting to do that is that I've always been interested in theological
matters in one way or another. And this seemed to me certainly a rather extreme
theological speculation, but certainly one that has a degree of validity,
especially if you believe, as I have a tendency to believe, that there is other
life in the universe, that we are not the only sentient creatures around, and
that we are not the only sentient creatures around who are going to wonder about
their origins, their ultimate ends, what have you. I would say, yeah, I would
say that the aliens were probably really genuinely looking for a variety of
salvation. At the same time, they may have been trying to show that they were,
despite all of their inscrutable behavior, companions to the human beings who
had taken them in. And that there is a kind of brotherhood across what the sea
is based.
Okay, the novel Stolen Faces, this is one of those that I had trouble kind of
formulating a question about because it hit me more emotionally than it did
logically. But it's more or less a leper colony. And again, it's got this theme
of an exiled group that's exiled because they have this disease, and it's got
some characters in it that are really hurting, that sort of thing. One of the
questions I wanted to ask you about that was, which I want to talk about some
other things later, is the Spanish influence. Did your experiences in Spain have
anything to do with this story, or did it come from something else? There were
several influences on that particular story, and I would say that the Spanish
influence, the fact that I attended my last year of high school in Spain at an
American-dependent school outside of Seville, did have an influence partly
because the one foreign language that I have is Spanish. That's the one foreign
language that I can deal with with any degree of authority at all, so that
helped. The other two influences on that particular book, however, were a book,
I can't remember the author's name at this point, but it was a study of the
Aztec civilization and Aztec culture. And at the same time, another book about
Father Damien, who was the leper priest on Molokai, an island in the Hawaiian
group. And so my disease, muformacy, as I call it in that particular novel,
Stolen Faces, is a variety of leprosy. I say as much in the course of the novel
itself, except that it can affect
somebody even in a temperate climate or a cold climate, as well as a tropical
climate, which is where Hansen's disease or leprosy usually strikes. The whole
point of the book, really, though, was to examine the nature of prejudice and
also what prejudice itself does to those who are discriminated against. And
really, that was the point of inspiration for Stolen Faces.
Transfigurations was the next novel, and it was a continuation of Death and
Designation among the Asadi. It's in the, or I figured it was in the same
universe as Stolen Faces. Right. And to me, the Asadi were really alien, which
again, I think real aliens would be. And this was an anthropology study, and it
was also, as I said, a continuation of the Death and Designation. Did you just,
that story, you liked the background, that sort of thing, did you always have
the idea of completing it and making a novel out of it? No. No, I never always
had the idea. I think when I wrote that story back in 72 or 73 that I felt that
I was pretty much finished with it, that it was complete. By the time I actually
undertook to do Transfigurations, I had thought some more about the characters
in that story, both the humans and the aliens. And I had also done a great deal
of reading on human origins, a lot of which I worked into the novel that
followed that one, No Enemy But Time. But at the same time, I guess I was really
kind of laying the groundwork for No Enemy But Time with the research that I did
that carried me through Transfigurations. The reason that I probably expanded
Transfigurations or Death and Designation among the Asadi into a full-length
novel that I called Transfigurations is that by that time I was a full-time
writer. I knew that this was one of my most popular stories, that there had been
questions about it. Some of the loose ends had not been tied up. And I wanted to
deal with the material again. And I wanted to deal with it from the perspective
of my new knowledge about human origins and primate anthology, that sort of
thing. So that was one of the reasons that I went ahead, used the original
novella as part of the text, and created a good deal of more information about
new characters and a sequel to the original novella in the course of the novel.
This is one of those real obvious questions, but I have to ask it because I do
want to know the answer too. In Transfigurations, the aliens' eyes are very
important. Of course, a funeral for the eyes of fire or eyes of fire, just the
title, it goes without saying that they are. And also, the house of
compassionate shares and pinyon fall, the eyes are really important. So it seems
to me that you have kind of, not a fixation, but they obviously symbolize
something. Is that true? Well, I would say that the eyes certainly do symbolize
something. I don't know whether I want to go a whole lot further than that. I
guess that it has always seemed to me that the eyes are, what's the old cliche,
the windows of the soul. And for an alien species, I think they would be
similarly a means of looking into the heart of the creature who has those eyes.
I think, too, I was looking early on when I wrote the early story, Pinyon Fall,
which was my first story, I was looking for a way of making my aliens seem
alien. And one of the ways was to describe them physically. And one of the most
outstanding characteristics of any creature, I think, are the eyes and how they
differ from one species to another. So the aliens in Pinyon Fall had eyes like
insects. In A Funeral for the Eyes of Fire, I guess I was again looking for a
means, an exotic means of establishing the fact that my aliens were truly alien.
And by giving them different eyes, eyes like gems, that was one way of doing
that. There may have been some subliminal influence, too, from one of the novels
of Ursula Le Guin. I'm trying to think now, which was of City of Illusions. I
think one of her characters has very, very strange eyes. But Ursula Le Guin has
been an influence on me from way back. And maybe that came into it to some
extent, too. As far as the eyes of the Asadi go and the fact that they are a
means of communication, as well as a means of seeing, and also a means of
feeding, when you discover that they enabled these creatures to photosynthesize
part of their food, I think there I was looking at the eyes in a functional
sense, as well as in a symbolic sense, as if they really were a physical
component of their makeup that could help them survive.
Knowing it but time is also an anthropology book, as you said. You probably, on
this one, had to do a lot of homework, I would think, for the pre-humans. Yes.
I've told people that I probably did three and a half to four years of research
for that book, and I believe that that's true. And by that, I don't mean that I
was continuously researching and doing nothing else, not writing anything else,
but only researching. But I, nevertheless, did spend a great, great deal of time
reading material to make my proto-humans, my hominids in that book, as near to
the real thing as I could imagine. So I read people like Lewis B. Leakey and
Mary Leakey and Richard Leakey, the entire Leakey clan, Donald Johansson,
everything I could get my hands on in scientific journals and news magazines
that related to new discoveries in East Africa, Tanzania, Kenya, wherever they
happened to be, Ethiopia, when Donald Johansson came along. So, yes, I spent an
awful lot of time researching the physical nature, the stature, the possible
lifestyles of these hominids, but also the flora and fauna at the same period so
that I could make a credible stab at what kinds of other animals they would
encounter, what kind of vegetation they would be living among, how they would
have to go about their survival strategies, in other words. So, yes, that took
me a lot of time. I found it very, very enjoyable while I was doing it, and I
really kind of put it out of my mind since then. I imagine that I may come back
to it later on, but I have kind of set it aside since then. That book, I
personally viewed as kind of a two-pronged, oh,
it had two facets, okay, that engaged me. One was the anthropology, the lore,
and that sort of thing. That was fascinating. But I also really liked the
protagonist. He was really engaging, likable, and in science fiction, especially
modern science fiction, you don't often find that, but I really liked the guy.
So I would assume that, well, I ask you, did he just pop in your mind, or does
the character just form gradually, and that's just how he turned out eventually?
I will have to say that really he formed gradually over the composition of the
book. Well, there were a number of things that my plot dictated. I had to have a
character who was somehow attuned to the distant past, and particularly the
distant past of Pleistocene, East Africa. And as a consequence, I came up with a
character who had vivid dreams, even from his infancy on, about this particular
period, so that his attunement to the Pleistocene in East Africa would make it
possible later on for an Air Force time program to actually send him back bodily
to that period, or a simulacrum of that period, as I explain it in the book. So
that much I knew I was going to have to give him. After that, however, I was
really kind of on my own to come up with the sort of person that he happened to
be, and that unfolded for me gradually in the composition of the book, and I was
kind of surprised to discover who Joshua Campa really was, or the kind of
character that he really was. And that was one of the nice things about writing
the book, too. Did you write the book in the order that we read it? In other
words, there are some alternating chapters, the past, the present, the past, the
present. Did you write it that way, or did you write all the past and all the
present, and then cut them up? To tell you the truth, I think I wrote
alternating chapters. There were a couple of occasions when perhaps the episodes
in the past, I may have split them up and inserted a chapter from the present or
from the near future. But for the most part, I actually did go back and forth. I
did not write them in the order that they actually occur in the book, however.
As a matter of fact, the first thing in the book, the prologue, I wrote at the
very end, after I had completed the composition of the entire novel. I might
also add here that David Hartwell, my editor at Timescape, was instrumental in
helping me to cut down the book. It was considerably longer than it is now, and
it's quite a long novel anyway. And he suggested the elimination of some
chapters that were really kind of peripheral to the development of Joshua Campa,
and also peripheral to the story of his return to and his life among the early
hominids. So it would be difficult for me right now to reconstruct the exact
order in which I wrote the individual chapters of that book. But I did write
some segments in the past, come and write some in the present, and then
eventually go back and kind of shuffle them together as if I were shuffling a
deck of cards. But perhaps, and at least I hope so, with a degree more, not the
same degree of randomness.
I read, unfortunately I wasn't there, but I read that in your Nebula acceptance
speech that you mentioned David Hartwell a couple of times and mentioned that he
had been helpful. So I take it that writers do appreciate it when good editors
can come along and help them see the forest instead of the trees, or the trees
instead of the forest, whatever you're supposed to say. Well, I owe a special
debt of gratitude to Hartwell. I would have to go back as far as a little
knowledge, for instance, because he helped me with that book, he helped me with
Catacomb Years. And although he had moved over to Timescape, which then was
simply a pocketbook, Simon & Schuster, before he came up with the Timescape logo
there. But he helped me also with Transfigurations. In other words, he was at
Berkeley Putnam when that book was contracted for, but he moved to pocketbooks
before he had a chance to work on it. Nevertheless, he did give me some help on
it, and he gave me a lot of help, as I've indicated, on No Enemy But Time. I
don't know whether all writers appreciate that sort of editorial help and
direction, but I know that I can use it upon occasion, and I think that Hartwell
happens to be one of the people in the field who can give intelligent help.
Under Heaven's Bridge was a collaboration with Ian Watson, with whom you've
collaborated on editing some short stories, if I might remember right, since
then. How did the mechanics of collaborating take place? And I also wanted to
venture a guess that the aliens were mostly you, mostly your aliens. I just
wanted to throw that in. Yeah, the aliens really are my aliens, because what Ian
wanted to do, in fact, what he suggested is that I write a story about the
aliens, the Cygnosticoi, from a little knowledge in catacomb years, but that
rather than showing them in a human environment, the urban nuclei, that I take
them and show them against the background of their home planet. So I told him, I
think I wrote him a letter. We'd been corresponding since about 1976, I believe.
And I wrote him a letter and said, I'm really tired of those aliens. I don't
think I want to do anything else with them at all. I'm finished with them. And
he wrote back at that juncture and gave me a number of interesting ideas about
them and said, it's really too bad because there are lots of good things that we
could still do with them. And at that point, we decided that maybe we could go
ahead and collaborate on it. So the aliens were mine, and Ian wanted to see what
they would be like on their own home world. So we sent an expedition, an Earth
expedition, to their home planet and had them encounter those aliens there. We
gave them a different name because we discovered a number of things about, well,
the star system 61 Cygnus is not really the kind of double binary that would
support the kind of life that I had come up with in a little knowledge and
catacomb years. So we had to change a few things. And so I think we called them
kybers in Under
Heaven's Bridge, which indicates that they are a kind of cyborg organism, but
naturally so, that they evolved in that fashion. And as far as the mechanics of
the collaboration went, Ian sent me about 30 pages of material, which included a
beginning, a middle, and an end, and suggested that we work from that as kind of
an outline. I took those 30 pages and expanded them to about 100, and then we
simply worked on interpolating new chapters in that material. I believe Ian
wrote the prologue to the book as well. And I had final control over the entire
manuscript just to make sure that the style was fairly consistent throughout.
Okay, I want to get off now and ask a couple of questions about poetry and how
it relates to your work. I think White Otters of Childhood, which I said a while
ago was my favorite story. The hero was Mark Cryer Raines, and he's a poet. And
he talks a lot about poetry in the story, and he quotes poetry. And he said,
there's a quote I remember one time where he said, you can't write poetry when
your spirit is submerged. So, I wanted to kind of delve into that. Is that you
talking? Because you do write poetry, and there must be some of you in him. And
is that true? Is that the way a poet works? Oh, golly. I think I probably ought
to acknowledge a death here to Rogers Elasny in particular. I don't know whether
you know, you must know, his early story, A Rose for Ecclesiastes, which has as
its protagonist a poet. And that story of his, I believe, well, it is. It's my
favorite story of his. And I think I was probably working with that story in
mind when I wrote The White Otters of Childhood. But I'll also have to say that
I had read recently, by that I mean before I began writing The White Otters, I
had read the poetry of St. John Perth, who is a French poet, was a French poet,
was a diplomat who also wrote poetry. And he has a long poem called Sea Marks.
And some of the lines in that particular poem suggested the title of The White
Otters of Childhood to me, and also the nature of the protagonist, also the
nature of the mood that I tried to evoke in the story. I don't think anybody has
really paid much attention to that or even noticed it, even though I think I
quote from him at the head of one of the sections of the story. I use an
epigraph of his at the head of one of the sections. As far as it being
impossible to write poetry when the spirit is submerged, is that what I said?
That's what you said. Okay, I would say that that's probably true. That disturbs
me a little bit because I find that lately I've written less and less poetry.
I'm not sure that my spirit is submerged so much as I am that poetry
does not put food on the table, whereas prose can sometimes do that. So I have
written a lot more prose lately than I have poetry, although I still like poetry
and would like to be able to write more.
What I need to do is ask you a short answer question and then flip my tape and I
have two more after that. Okay, good. Okay, so I'll reverse the order because I
wanted to ask the other one first but I'll ask the other one. Is science fiction
poetry viable? Because you have written some science fictional poetry as well. I
have down here the rhyme between Betelgeuse and Proust, and for the Lady of a
Physicist, I was kind of tickled by that rhyme. But is science fiction poetry,
is that just a gimmick that people can use and get in the magazine? Or is that?
Do you think that's something that's real and maybe will become more important?
Well, I've always felt that it was possible to write poetry about anything so
that it seems to me entirely possible and viable and legitimate to write poetry
about speculative
subjects, or subjects that use science in one way or another. Whether it's a
gimmick on the part of the people who are writing it to get into the magazines,
I have no idea. I'm sure that the science fiction magazines could not publish
any other type of poetry, however, but poetry that deals with a speculative
subject or with science in some way or another. I'm sure that the science
fiction is a good idea. I'm sure that the science fiction is a good idea. I'm
sure that the science fiction is a good idea. I'm sure that the science fiction
is a good idea. I'm sure that the science fiction is a good idea. I'm sure that
the science fiction is a good idea. I'm sure that the science fiction is a good
idea. I'm sure that the science fiction is a good idea. I'm sure that the
science fiction is a good idea. I'm sure that the science fiction is a good
idea.